Done
----
   Wimp$Font, Wimp$FontSize, Wimp$FontWidth.

   A new font, WIMPSymbol, has arrows (left, right, up, down) which may be
used in any icon (whether in the WIMP font or in a locally-defined scalable
font). It may also be used in documents in the same way as any other font.
It is loaded into ResourceFS along with the other ROM fonts.

   Desktop font in L40-type icons. Text is filled and centred, both
horizontally and vertically.

   New Filer Templates file gives left-justified file names in directory
displays. This is included in the new WIMP.

   All known bugs fixed.

   Dynamic computation of menu width.

   Parse menu entries and right-justify shortcuts.

To do
-- --

   Check the font variables on Message_WimpFontChanged and take appropriate
action.

   Change the Filer such that the Full Info display uses icons for the
information, rather than system font text. (When this happens, the Filer
templates should probably be taken out of the WIMP.)

   Fix the bugs reported by William:

      Impression writing outside work area - never seen that before, happens
      a lot. Somehow broken clipping there. Impression windows are
      'unbounded' by the screen - could this be affecting it?

      NetFiler crashes when Impression is loaded! Don't know why.

      The baseline of icons in the wimp font should be precisely where it
      was with the system font.

      Sometimes you don't fill the background when painting an icon.
      Example, in Edit's Find box: try to find a string 'xxx' which isn't in
      the current file. The messages 'searching' and 'not found' are written
      on top of each other, without clearing the bottom one.

      Some menus which consist of a writable icon shrink considerably,
      leaving an uncomfortably small area in which to write. Maybe the
      quoted menu width should be taken as the minimum width? Not sure. I
      realise this is a change to the spec. The 'new directory' entry in the
      Filer is a good example. If people want to achieve this effect they
      can always pad the title bar with spaces!

      I think it would be better if the Filer templates were not included in
      the Wimp - I can soft-load them separately. The WimpSymbol font, and
      the Homerton.Medium tuned bitmap, should however be in the Wimp.

      I suppose, for soft-loading on RISC OS 3.11, that the Sprites and
      Tools resource files could in fact be found by peeking into the ROM.
      This is naughty, but saves 44K of soft-loading space which is quite a
      lot. Hum, this means that Wimp will not work with future OS releases -
      but then, future OS releases will not need it (I assume!). So, overall
      I think this is worth doing.

      I think it's worth doing the updates to the Filer and NetFiler, when
      the Wimp is believed complete. Steve Cormie has recently made a change
      or two to the Filer to incorporate solid dragging I believe, I don't
      know if he has checked these in so please make sure that he has.

      I dither over whether the fix we currently use to the Filer small-icon
      view is acceptable. Maybe we should insist on the writing lining up?
      Let's see what it is like in its current form, and see if people
      grumble.

   Fix other bugs:

      The vertical arrow keys, when used to move the caret between icons,
      get the positioning wrong. For an example of this, use the NFSFiler
      Mount menu entry. Fill in a password of a few characters, then move
      the caret to the icon above by using the Up key. It goes to the wrong
      place.

   Check that assembling the WIMP with 'outlinefont' set to {FALSE} gives a
working WIMP.

   Make sure that reversed menus still work (WIMPWriteDir 1).

   Do all the error box handling work (if it specified anywhere).
