Perl 5								21.2.96
------

Port 1.51, February 1996. Changes by S.W.Ellacott@brighton.ac.uk

Installation: just copy !Perl onto your hard disc and merge this !System with
your own (it installs a module gdbm).

Support for dbm and syscall added.
Internet support removed 'cos it doesn't work anyway.
Fixed lots of bugs, including the backtick and ENV hash (see below).
 - see SWEchanges for more details.

Perl 5								3.7.95
------

This is RISC OS version 1.50 of Larry Wall's Perl based on the source for
Perl 5.001. There has been a complete turn around since the original release
(1.00) due to various problems which appeared to be due to incompatibilities
with UnixLib. The main trouble was that perl was using a ludicrous amount of
memory for even small tasks and was unable to increase its wimpslot
automatically. There is no release date for the next version of UnixLib which
should fix these problems so, for the moment at least, I have decided to stop
using it. Instead, I have used Paul Moore's excellent Utils library and the
acorn specific functions from his original port of Perl 3, slightly altered
for the new version.

This means there is no longer any Unix path name conversion built in to the
program so if someone wants to write a function/module/utility to optionally
do this, feel free :-). I have written a hacked version of fopen to deal with
.pl and .pm suffixes but this really needs to be more comprehensively done.
At the moment it tries to open the name as given and on failure checks for a
suffix (eg foo.pl) then tries to open pl.foo. It also checks the scripts
directory as a last resort but you must use a .pl suffix for this to work.

BSD socket support is included but I have no idea how well it will work, if
at all, due to the lack of file descriptors in RISC OS. Some of it definately
*won't*, so be careful. See the source package for details on how to recompile
without this (eg if you're short of space).

The help files are still in html format (use ArcWeb to read them). I've
written a script to convert the original .pod files to stronghelp format but
it's a bit of a mess just now and stronghelp isn't ideally suited to large
pages of information - eg you can't have links to other parts of the same
page afaik and there are a lot of these in the perl manual. I've heard people
moaning that the html man pages are difficult to print out. Not surprising
that, really. Seems like a drastic waste of paper too. If you desperately
need to print something then get a copy of Johan Vroman's "Quick Reference
Guide". It's available from ftp.cis.ufl.edu:/pub/perl/doc/perlref-5.000.0.tar.gz.
This should keep you going till the new version of the Camel Book comes out.

Still no sign of Perl 5.002. 

All the Best,

Luke. 


gapv76@udcf.gla.ac.uk
ltaylor@physics.gla.ac.uk


Acknowledgements:
------------------

Larry Wall and Co. for obvious reasons.

Paul Moore for his original port and his unix utilities which provided the
bulk of the extra code needed. Also for his suggestions and criticisms :-).

Jochen from the Stuttgart archive for his suggestions and testing.

Alun Jones for working hard on his thesis :-).

Everyone else who's shown an interest.

Bugs:
-----

Not many known ones in this revamped version. System calls are still a bit
dodgy when using backticks (eg $blah = `cat`;). If in doubt, use system()
instead.

I still haven't fixed the %ENV hash to give the initial environment but
you can set system variables by assigning to it, eg

$ENV{'Perl$Dir'} = "$.Some.Directory";


That's it.