Log file for !Edit.

03-Nov-88: WRS: 0.58:
  search past char 255 used to crash, fixed.
  auto-page-up/down on v. large files could crash, fixed.
  very large filename strings could cause a crash, fixed.
  data transfer to temporary file used to set window title
    (e.g. to !PrinterXX), fixed.
Known bugs:
  Some fonts (e.g. trinity medium 12-point in mode 12) are
    not widely enough space: not clear if it's Edit or the font
    at fault.
  Create->TextFile sometimes creates a garabage file type.
  for non-text files, default name should not be TextFile
  press F5 (goto box) then click ADJ outside it: crash.
  some subtle redraw bugs on long wrapped lines/complex undos.

09-Nov-88: WRS: 0.59:

Minor fix to gotoline, ADJ outside box caused a crash, fixed.
Better check of out-of-space when creating typed files
Creating Text files could produce garbage timestamp, fixed.
Better default names when saving unnamed typed files
Gap between text lines widened by two pixels, should prevent anti-aliasing
  making lines sometimes overlap
In info box template, spurious invisible OK button removed which caused mysterious
  response to "o" from info box.

20-Nov-88: WRS: 0.63:

A couple of places where store allocation failing was not checked, fixed.
Copyright message in the Info box
Task window better at handling ESC
Text width/height/margin/line spacing, huge numbers no longer accepted.
Char 127 in system font now displayed properly as hex number.
Dragging file to icon bar could leave "modified" flag and title * out of step, fixed.
Redraw when at start of file after some complex operations,
  e.g. undoing a para-format or global replace could go wrong and leave the
  caret in the wrong place. Fixed.
Bug in case-sensitive find searching past char(255), fixed.
Slight space leak on task deletion, fixed.
"are you sure" question cannot fail for lack of space now.
Clicking on menu entries leading to dboxes (except Save) now has no effect.
Click/RETURN in the set-width field for formatting paragraphs, formats
  the paragraph.
Occasional crash on loading a file, subsequent to a load failing due to
  "not listening" (e.g. file present but load fails), fixed.

23-Nov-88 WRS: 0.64:

Suspended killed task (in a task window) half way through a system command
would never die: Such a task is now woken up again, so that it can
continue (the output being discarded) allowing the system command
to finish, and the task to die.
A large move or copy would sometimes produce a spurious second error
message: fixed.
Click on Save non-leaf menu item does nothing if there's no name, rather
than failing to save to ''.
"task input" on the Task menu used to toggle the following menu item too: fixed.
Bug in block-indent by negative amount, with smaller (non-zero) lines
present than the indentation amount: fixed.
Bug that caused occasional crashes when loading files, NOT fixed properly
in 0.63: done right now!

01-Dec-88 WRS: 0.65:

Bug in clicking on the Save in the root menu, fixed.
Bug in sending a 0-length file by RAM transfer, fixed.
Bug in para-format (when last line of para fitted exactly) fixed.
Known bug remains in desktop-closedown when there is still an
unmodified file in Edit: desktop-closedown *can* fail to continue
after asking the question.

07-Dec-88 WRS: 0.66:

Error message for not enough space/too many windows improved.
Rare possible bug with too many windows (in common with Paint/Draw) fixed.
ReadMe file added to release.

13-Dec-88 WRS: 0.67:

Insertion of a zero-length file no longer sets "modified" flag.
Crash on loading very large file when not enough space, fixed.

14-Dec-88 WRS: 0.68:

Dragging a file to the icon bar when too many windows up used to crash, fixed.
Repeatedly typing SH-CTL-F12 with a modified buffer, used to
  crash eventually - fixed.

15-Dec-88 WRS: !Boot file now mentions Edit, not ArcEdit.

20-Dec-88 WRS: 1.00:
ReDo as first thing done to a buffer crashed: fixed.
Negative line separation on system font ignored.
Go or Count during find, ignored if null search string.

31-Jan-89 WRS: 1.01:
column tab, overwrite and wordwrap modes added.
See ReadMe file for full details of operation.

08-Feb-89 WRS: 1.02:
slight but in overwrite-mode fixed,
  hitting RETURN should not replace the char.

09-Feb-89 WRS: 1.03:
new task module, better ESC handling.

11-Apr-89: WRS: 1.04:
when displaying fonts, notices which chars are defined and displays them.
char has zero width -> uses hex display (chars >128 only)

23-May-89: WRS: 1.06:
New Edit$Options:
  D - worDwrap on new windows
  O - Overwrite in new windows
  T - column Tab
  U<number> - set size of Undo buffer.
drag in a file/directory to Edit with Shift held down -> insert the file's path-name.
See !Edit.ReadMe for a fuller description of these facilities.

23-May-89: WRS: 1.07:
bugfix re pressing DELETE when off to the right of a line (using TAB or right-arrow)

15-June-89: WRS: 1.08:
Moved to the 300-series compiler: recent CLib needed now.
Slight improvement to reduce horizontal scrolling during
  vertical thumbing.

19-June-89: WRS: 1.09:
New resource "Messages", can be edited by installer if required (e.g. into
  French).
Minor fix: copyright message said 1988.

19-July-89: WRS: 1.10:
Some messages had been missed out of Messages, it's now more complete.
Linked with new RISC_OSLib, so bug concerning Save box staying up
  after a save now fixed.

29-Sep-89: WRS: 1.12:
With display line spacing negative, the cursor centring is now better.
In overwrite mode, DEL replaces with space rather than shortening the line.
Module version (for ROM) now available.

03-Oct-89: WRS: 1.13:
fixed bug in last release re compiling ROM version.

09-Oct-89: WRS: 1.14:
TaskWindow: new module, should fix occasional random crashes.
Desktop saving in place.
One or two messages that had escaped, added to Messages file.
Templates: "found" dbox moved to the right a little.
Very big files should now load where they might have failed before.
Hourglass now shows on "continue" find, and on loading a file.
On the menu tree, the representation of keyboard shortcuts has changed.
Timebomb installed (requested by JAM): in 90 days the program will
  refuse (politely) to load.

25-Oct-89: WRS: 1.15:
Loading large files now faster.
Drag/inserting a file inserts before the caret, rather than after.
This means that select/drag several appends them in the sensible order,
  rather than reversed order.
Selection menu entries are only enabled if THIS file contains the selection.
Better allocation of static space in ROM version, none allocated
  until !Edit actually started.

31-Oct-89: WRS: 1.16:
Fixed bug in ROM version whereby multiple instantiations would crash.
Selection menu entries changed back to pre-1.15, except that the
  Select->Save menu entry is only enabled if THIS file contains the selection.

08-Nov-89: WRS: 1.17:
Now much smaller, and needs SharedCLibrary 4.00 or more.

09-Nov-89: WRS: 1.18:
Saves Edit$Options on desktop boot sequence creation.
Changed wording of "Create" submenu from "New foo" to "Foo".
Changes in SharedCLibrary version 4.01 (available soon):
  Edit$Options updated when you change display options
  Definition of word (for movement, deletion, selection) somewhat better
  Tab with wrapped line above now works better.
  ^F6 at the end of a line, includes that line in the format op
  after ^F6, caret is placed one character further on.
  F6 at end of file, selects the last character in the file.

07-Dec-89: WRS: 1.19:
"Wrap" menu entry changed to "Window wrap".
"CR <-> LF" menu entry now has ^F8 written by it.
bug fix: desktop save, options string set before running Edit.

The bug in double-clicking to select a word, is in fact in SharedCLibrary 4.01.
It will be fixed in future/imminent SharedCLibraries.

15-Jun-90: NDR: 1.21:
Message_DataOpen with estimated size = -2 => leave text untitled.
RISC_OSLib also updated so that Message_DataSaved => mark text unmodified.

