
Documentation on how to use Edit can be found in Edition 2 of the Archimedes
User Guide.

The following remarks should be noted about this version of Edit and its
documentation.

The TAB key can be used to move the caret along the line to the column
position that matches the start of the next word boundary on the line above,
provided that the 'line above' is not wrapped.

When forming a selection using the SELECT and ADJUST mouse keys, if CTRL is
held down, the caret will not be moved. This makes it easier to copy a block
of text to where the caret already is: hold down CTRL, make the selection,
type C, release CTRL.

ADJUST on the close box of an Edit window will close the window (if the
window is not modified) and open the parent directory viewer. This should be
thought of as similar to ADJUST on the close box of a directory viewer.

The vertical scroll bar indicates the fraction of the file currently visible
as a fraction of the total number of characters, rather than as a fraction of
the number of lines.  This means that the length of the vertical scroll bar
will vary dependent upon the number of characters in the window.

If a desktop closedown sequence (e.g. Exit from the Task manager menu)
occurs when Edit has some modified buffers, Edit sometimes erroneously
terminates the desktop closedown sequence. It is of course normal practice
to save your work before trying to exit the desktop.

The following features are added since Edit 1.00, and not mentioned in the
Archimedes User Guide or A3000 User Guide.

Column tab mode: in this mode the tab key will insert spaces to align the
cursor to a multiple of 8 columns vertically. The mode is toggled by a menu
entry on the Misc menu, or by sh-f3.

Overwrite mode: in this mode characters typed will overwrite existing
characters in the file, rather than being inserted: this is useful for
editing fixed-format forms etc. The mode is toggled by a menu entry on the
Misc menu, or by sh-f1.

Wordwrap mode: in this mode characters typed (and also simple deletion
characters) will cause continuous reformatting of the text following the
cursor, as if format-text (ctl-f6) were being selected after every
keystroke. The mode is toggled by a menu entry on the Misc menu, or
by ctl-f5.

All three modes are displayed on the title bar of the window to which they
apply.

The default settings of newly created windows can be set in Edit$Options.
  O - set overwrite mode
  D - set worDwrap mode
  T - set column Tab mode
Example:
  *Set Edit$Options l-3 t h12 w8 nCorpus.Medium

It's also possible to set the size of the undo buffer attatched to a window
in this way, by using
  U<number> - set size of Undo buffer, in bytes.
The default value is 5000 bytes per window (less is taken if there is no
space available).

If you drag a file into an Edit window (as though inserting the file) but
keep the shift key held down while doing this, then the full path-name of
the file (rather than the file itself) is inserted. This can be very useful
when constructing command scripts.

The following textual messages are included in !Edit's image. You can
replace them by adding a line with a suitable tag at the front to the
Messages resource file.

alarm1:Unable to read monotonic time
alarm2:Not enough memory to set alarm -- increase wimpslot
dbox1:Not enough memory to create dialogue box -- increase wimpslot
dbox2:Templates file not loaded for use with dialogue boxes
flex1:Flex memory error
flex2:Not enough memory, or not within *desktop world
flex3:Flex not intialised
heap1:Not enough memory to create heap -- free some application memory
heap2:Heap_alloc error: %s
heap3:Fatal internal heap error
heap4:Heap_free error: %s
heap5:Heap not initialised
menu1:Not enough memory for menu (1) -- increase wimpslot
menu2:Not enough memory for menu (2) -- increase wimpslot
menu3:Not enough memory for menu (3) -- increase wimpslot
resspr1:Not enough memory to load sprite file '%s' -- increase wimpslot
resspr2:Unable to load sprite file '%s'
saveas1:To save, drag the icon to a directory viewer
template1:Template '%s' not found
template2:Template load failed: %s
template3:Not enough memory to load templates -- increase wimpslot
template4:Cannot open file: %s
template5:Read failed for %s
template6:Template file not found
template7:Not enough memory to load templates -- increase wimpslot
template8:Template load failed
wimpt1:%s has suffered a fatal internal error (type=%i) and must exit immediately
wimpt2:%s has suffered a fatal internal error (%s) and must exit immediately
win1:Too many windows
win2:Not enough memory to change window title -- increase wimpslot
xferrecv1:Can't transfer file (use *Set Wimp$Scrap <filename>)
xferrecv2:Data transfer failed
xfersend1:Bad data transfer, receiver dead
xfersend2:Selection
